---
title: '_Merd-urinous_ Epic: Classicity as Undisposable Waste in the Ecosystem of _The Famous Voyage_'
author: G. E. Saretto
date: March 9th, 2015
bibliography: voyage.bib
---

The last poem in Ben Jonson is considered to be a mock heroic poem. I believe that the approach is misleading. _Epigramme CXXXIII_, also known as _The Famous Voyage_, is not a mock-heroic poem. Peter Medine, for instances, sees it as "a mock epic" that eventually extends to a comment on "the decline of literature and science" and to a "criticism to society in general" [@Medine1975, 97-105]. This is not simply the product of an "interweav[_ing_] of satire and saturnalia," occasionally "enlivened by carnivalesque humour" [@McRae1998]. Nevertheless, we will try to prove that Ben Jonson's rhetorical understanding and use of the epic tradition in this epigramme is not simply parodic; it constructs, instead, an elaborated move of discard and restitution that, in the end, functions as an indictment against the pollution of the Ditch and the conditions of consumption and parasitic trade that produced it.

in _Poetaster_ "a literal purge of bad language" functions as "a materialized enactment of humanistic education" and as "literary criticism at work, a whole humanistic socioaesthetics concretized in a single, graphic act" [@Robinson2014, 563] Ben Jonson's first move in _The Famous Voyage_ is a similar sort of purge. Setting up the premises for the journey that he is going to describe, and for which he is going to ask his readers to join him, he begins by telling us all that his voyage will _not_ entail.

> NO more let _Greece_ her bolder fables tell  
> Of _Hercules_, or _Theseus_ going to _hell_,  
> _Orpheus_, _Ulysses_: or the _Latine Muse_,  
> With tales of _Troyes_ just knights our faiths abuse:  
> We have a _Shelton_, and a _Heyden_ got,  
> Had power to act, what they to faine had not.  

Accostumed to the modes of epic, we might initially think that this could be an _occupatio_, a topic refusal to indulge in the narration of facts that are actually narrated by the same denial (_example?_); but these first six lines, which open and close on _NO_ and _not_, are actually different: without giving us any true information about them, they simply _name_ these referents, with the sole purpose of discarding them. This first rhetorical gesture is an act of exclusion and the setting of a boundary: before the actual incipit of the poem, which will be signalled by the subtitle _The Voyage It Selfe_, the poet needs to push a number of elements outside of it. This is a list of referents that the poet wants to leave behind, and to do without; placed outside of the typographic boundaries of the _Voyage It Selfe_, this is the garbage bin, the disposable container. And these objects are bound to be thrown away.

A typographical mark, the _italic_ font, distinguishes the entity of these discarded, or disposable, referents. They are the proper names of classical heroes (_Hercules_, _Theseus_, _Orpheus_, _Ulysses_), to which is added a single, unspecified _Latine Muse_, and three places: an anonymous _hell_, rhyming with the deceiving "tell" performed by antiquity, and two toponyms - _Greece_ and _Troyes_. The name of the country and the name of the city in fact open and close the sequence, narrowing down the reader's attention from a cultural to an urban synecdoche. In fact, each one of these specific references serves as a synecdoche for those "bolder fables" with which classical literature "our faiths abuse."

- Remember that London remains the _New Troy_.

- This falsity is more than simply fiction: this falsity has to be equated with religion. Please work on the key rhyme of _Muse_/_abuse_.

Falsity seems in fact to be the principal reason for the disposal of this cultural patrimony. Analogous to the characters of another notorious fabulous genre of the time, chivalric romance, the "just knights" contained in those "tales" are condemned because of their lack of actual "power," to which the poet will oppose - we might assume - a true "act." The poet seems sincerely committed to "the pervasive topicality [which] creates an impression of realism and inclusiveness." [@Medine1975, 98]. The only indication about the entity of the adventure that the epigramme will relate is expressed by the almost incidental phrase "going to _hell_," perhaps suggestively asserting the destination of _Hercules_ and _Theseus_; nevertheless, the stark contrast between the third person of the first four lines ("they") and the first person of the fifth ("We"), together with the mention of two potentially obscure characters known only to the poet and his circle of friends, seem to aim at proving the authenticity of the story. "Perhaps their obscurity, except among those readers who had drunk regularly with them at the Mermaid tavern, was part of the joke." [@Duncan-Jones2005, 259] Not Troy but London: this is what _we_ (my friends and I) know about hell.

- Here you should perhaps mention these two lines:

	> Then let the former age, with this content her,  
	> Shee brought the _Poets_ forth, but ours th'adventurer.  

These last two lines in fact introduce what will be the leading move of the following section: replacement follows rejection, and the poet asks his readers to accept the superiority, both qualitative and quantitative, of his product, especially when compared to the "fables" of "Greece."

> Their wherry had no saile, too; ours had none:  
> And in it, two more horride knaves, then _Charon_.  
> Arses were heard to croake, in stead of frogs;  
> And for one _Cerberus_, the whole coast was dogs.  
> _Furies_ there wanted not: each scold was ten.  

If the first line might be an ironical marker of the clumsiness of this comparison, since the absence of a "saile" tells us very little about the comparability between the two vessels, the subsequent substitutions present an increase in intensity and number about which the poet seems to have no doubt. The poem will have _two_ knaves instead of one _Charon_, and both _more horride_. The potentially pastoral, even idyllic _frogs_ that in Aristophanes accompanied Dyonisus' journey to Hades will be replaced by the noisy emissions of "Arses," with a shift in setting that adds smell to sound. Pure quantity motivates the exchange between _one_ _Cerberus_ and a hyperbolic coast of _dogs_, whereas the refusal of the _Furies_ in favor of the _scolds_ seems to function in an even more explictily economical manner. We are not told that the _scolds_ are worse than the _Furies_ in any of their specific attributes; but we are not told that there are more scolds than _Furies_ either. Instead, working at the intersection between quantity and quality, we find a numerical correspondence between them, as if the poet had been able to monetize their value.  Set on a decimal scale, _Furies_ and scolds function as the different coins of the same currency: we discard one and prefer the other because of their monetary worth.

In the age of the rise of consumerism, with the "The transformation of this literary debate, contrasting the old deceiving epic with the new realistic chronicle, into a commercial exchange based on quantity and monetized worth, must have resonated with Ben Jonson's preoccupations at the time of completing his collection of Epigrams, of which _Famous Voyage_ constitutes the last. We know that, before knowing its definite publication in the _Works_ of 1616, the series was "licensed for issue in 1612 as a self-contained volume" [@Miles1990, 170] : this must have been a complex decision for Jonson, who could not resist "the lure of print" while being at the same time "strongly drawn by the notion of coterie poetry and manuscript circulation" [@Donaldson2000, 123]. The epigrams, which he considered "more important than anything he had written for performance" [@Miles1990, 169], had to leave the privileged space of literary circles in order to enter the open arena of the market place. In a way, Jonson seems to be negotiating the identity of his poem in the same way as he would be negotiating is own identity as it would be conveyed by editorial practices and choices:

> In accordance with his aim, Jonson's presentation of his work throughout the Folio was rigidly controlled. He deliberately excluded anything he considered not consonant with the high level both of his best work and of the serious pretentions of the volume. Firmly discarded, for instance, were all the early or apprentice works; Jonson comes before his public with _Every Man in his Humor_ as a fully fledged dramatist, not perhaps at the level of mastery he is to attain, but evidently no novice. [@Miles1990, 159]

Publication is a matter of exclusion and improvement: in order to sell one's identity, one should leave beyond everything that could be considered disposable (the early plays in macroorganism of the folio, epic in the microorganism of _Famous Voyage_), and only present the new, improved version of the self.

The opening lines of _The Voyage It Selfe_ actually confirm the way in which this smaller structure could work as a synecdoche for the whole editorial process: after having left the old referents behind, and after having purged his poetry from the waste of epic superstition, the poet seems eager to show us the new direction towards which the vessel of his poetry is sailing.

> I sing the brave adventure of two wights,  
> And pitty 'tis, I cannot call them knights:  
> One was; and he, for brawne, and braine, right able  
> To have beene stiled of King _Arthurs_ table.  
> The other was a squire, of faire degree;  
> But, in the action, greater man than hee:  
> Who gave, to take at his returne from _Hell_,  
> His three for one. Now, lordings, listen well.  
> It was the day, what time the powerfull _Moone_  
> Makes the poore _Banck-side_ creature wet it' shoone,  
> In it' owne hall; when these (in worthy scorne  
> Of those, that put on moneyes, on returne  
> From _Venice_, _Paris_, or some in-land passage  
> Of sixe times to, and fro, without embassage,  
> Or him that backward went to _Berwicke_, or which  
> Did dance the famous Morrisse, unto _Norwich_)  
> At _Bread-streets_ Mermaid, having din'd, and merry,  
> Propos'd to goe to _Hol'borne_ in a wherry:  
> A harder tasque, then either his to Bristo',  
> Or his to _Antwerpe_. Therefore, once more, list ho'.  

Through a number of specific references to "authenticated exploits of the day" [most of them successfully identified by @Donaldson2011, pp. 32-34], the voyage is compared to those "wager journeys" that "had long since established [_themselves_] as a recognizable component of England's pervasive performance culture" [@Manous2009, 3]. In these circumstances, people would actually "put on moneyes" _against_ the chances of the traveller. As Manous explains, "If the journey was not completed and verified according to the terms of the wager, the traveler forfeited this sum; but if the journey was successfully completed and verified [...], the traveller was typically owed [...] a threefold to fivefold increase" [@Manous2009, 8-9]. Perhaps assimilating the practice to that of international trade [**QUOTATION NEEDED HERE**], the poet seems to be asking his readers to invest on his literary journey, which will be completed according to the terms declared at the beginning, namely - the exclusion of the false beliefs of classical literature, the acquisition of a new, witnessed realism.

It would be misleading, however, to understand the position of the reader as that of a simple investor. Like the "squire" that will be sailing the _Fleet_, the reader himself should wager "His three for one" on the journey: in this expression, therefore, we include not only the money that the reader might have invested on the complete volume of the _Epigrammes_, but also a simple matter of attention and faith: this is why the poet insists on imperatives such as "Now lordings, listen well" and "once more, list ho'": the simple attention devoted to the poem is equivalent to the money that one could wager on the performance of a journey. What is being truly lent here, more than the money invested in the book, is truly our trust in the poet's ability to provide us with some content that is not only better and more, but also true and devoid of superstition.

This initial section of _The Voyage It Selfe_ is therefore consistently devoid of classical references; the single intertextual connection is to the world of chivalric romance, perhaps an initial slip. The two wights _cannot_ be called _knights_ because that would be a lie to the reader; the only possible move is to compare the one that already is a knight to the ones that would be sitting at "_King Arthurs_" table. Again, we are told that in any case the reality that we are being shown, and to which the poet proudly belongs, is better than any deceiving fiction surroundig it: the worthier of the two adventurers is _the squire_, "in the action," which the poet has praised, "greater man than hee." The sequence of comparisons and contextualizations of this specific feat - "to goe to _Hol'borne_ in a wherry" - is then entirely related to actual, concrete historical feats, securely connected to specific names of places and people.

The poet has therefore established an exchange based on the discarding of an old, fallacious tradition, consisting of superstious beliefs that would _abuse_ the reader's mind, and on the acquisition of what is both is new and true. The initial section of the poem - the proemium - has listed a series of referents that, in synecdoche, stand for everything that the poetical _Famous Journey_ has to dispose of before beginning its travel. As we have anticipated, it is not new for Jonson to consider this move of exclusion a sort of _purge_: the fragments of literature and false belief that have been thrown away are excrements left behind by the two characters travelling on the sailless wherry. In the early seventeenth century the usage of _excrement_ was still suspended between "superfluous matter thrown off by the bodily organs" and the more general "That which remains after a process of sifting or refining" (OED). Reminding us of Jonson's personal process of selection at the moment of compiling his completed works, this rhetorical move is of course consistent with the setting of the action narrated, the river Fleet. Already "become worse cloyed and choken than ever it was before" at the time when John Stow was writing his _Survey_, "by means of continual encroachments upon the banks getting over the water, and casting of soilage into the stream", [@Stow, 73], the river notoriously received the largest share of the "rich stew" deriving "from domestic and trade sources, particles of earth, soot, sands, turds and rainwater," together with "the oily discharge from tanneries and the noxious and toxic waste products of the dyers' trade" [@Cockayne2007, 199]. The Fleet in particular had the privilege of hosting a number of privies located just above it [@Cockayne 2007, 200]. The scatological nature of this landscape is therefore consistent with the rhetorical move that substantiates the initial section of the poem: the Fleet is the space where, like the poet himself, the entirety of the city discards its abundant waste.

- The _we_ of these first lines is also the _we_ for which we know that BJ is describing an actual experience - the pollution of the stream flowing by his house when he was a kid.

Indeed, the first half of the poem is devoted to the transformation of this body of water into the grotesque digestive channell of the collective body of the city, "a grotesque urban body" [@McRae1998]. As McRae has insightfully demonstrated, the leading image of the description of the ditch is its assimilation to "the alimentary canal, understood in Renaissance medical theory to be a single channel winding through the body, which received and digested food, and subsequently ehected food." One of the most suggestive ideas of the poem, then, would be that of pushing the travellers along an opposite trajectory, moving "haltingly through images of excretion to images of the preparation and consumption of food. [@McRae1998]. The first half of the poem is therefore devoted to this notion of ejection and purgation, compatible with the rhetorical move practiced by Jonson, and exemplarily embodied by the appearance of the first "ugly monster."

> In the first jawes appear'd that ugly monster,  
> Ycleped _Mud_, which, when their oares did once stirre,  
> Belch'd forth an ayre, as hot, as at the muster  
> Of all your night-tubs, when the carts due cluster,  
> Who shall discharge first his merd-urinous load:  

The poet insists on the notions of emission ("Belch'd forth") and ejection ("discharge"), while at the same time identifiying the bodily functions of the monstruous _Mud_ with the commercial transactions happening every day in the city surrounding it, for which "carts" constantly exchange their "load." This expulsion is therefore an intrinsic part of the consumeristic economy of the city: it is one end of the cycle of production, the disposal of the rotten, the old, and the dead for everything that is new and fresh. The cause of the hyperbolical production of human waste will later be located in the "spirits, [...] pills, and [...] potions, | Suppositories, cataplasmes, and lotions" (**LINE?**) used, "in shitten sort," to purge the body of Londoners from the unhealthy food that they consume every day.

Indeed, the second part of the poem, where we ascend the alimentary canal individuated by McRae, shows us culinary habits that are everything but salubrious. this section of the poem seems to constantly suggest a notion of incessant contamination and reciprocal poisoning between the waste being discarded in the river - "grease, and haire of meazled hogs, | The heads, houghs, entrailes and the hides of dogs" - and the food being prepared by the "hoot cookes" who there "doe dwell." The practice which perhaps Jonson seems to be most aware of is that for which "rottling in the back alleys and dunghills, pigs picked up contamination from city industries and noisome ditches filled with night soil and street sweepings. Mingling with digs increased the circulation of disease and intestinal worms. Some of these diseases were of course thought to be "transmissible to humans if infected meat was consumed." [@Cockayne2007, 95-97] In a rotten ecosystem, the animals "flead, and roasted | And, after mouldie growne, againe [...] roasted" had probably ingested the waste thrown in the river, before being again ingested by the humans that hunt and cook them. Introduced by the fantasmatic clouds of _Atoms_ that brood over the shores of the ditch, poisonous clouds of colorful "farts [...] late departed | White, black, blew, greene, and in more forms outstarted,"  A relative scientific awareness about the unstoppable pervasiveness of the "_Atomi_ ridicolous" described by "_Democrite_, and _Hill Nicholas_" seems to justify these anxieties: "bad airs - or miasmas" were thought to "caus[_e_] and spread diseases when [...] breathed in." As we reach the mouth of the river, therefore, we discover that what is ingested equals what is ejected: the horrendous discovery is that the two ends of the canal, the mouth and the anus, are horrendously similar to each other.

Indeed, although the thematical shift from excrement to nourishment described by McRae is undoubtedly true, we perceive that the alimentary end of the _Famous Voyage_ is disturbingly undistinguishable from its fecal beginning. There is a threatening confusion in the "monstruous femininity" of this London, evocative of a "grotesque female body with the Ditch a filthy channel into it, [...] ambiguously mouth, vagina, and anus" [@Robinson2014, 569], a confusion that might be compared to to what Julia Kristeva would define as "_abject_ [...], the jettisoned object" which, being "radically excluded [_,_] draws [_one_] towards the place where meaning collapses [@Kristeva2002, 230]. This collapse in meaning, provoked by a sudden encounter with the "body fluids, [...] defilement, [...] shit" and "death" [@Kristeva2002, 231] of the Fleet, is suggested by what, in the very proemium, Jonson describes in terms of "confus[_ion_]".

> All, that they boast of _Styx_, of _Acheron_,  
> _Cocytus_, _Phlegeton_, our have prov'd in one;  
> The filth, stench, noyse: save only what was there  
> Subtly distinguish'd, was confused here.  

The four rivers of Hades converge into a single earthly waterway, in a numerical equivalence that would still motivate our preference for the contemporary adventure over the old epic. Nevertheless, this sum presents a fault, introduced by the concessive phrase "save only": the fact that the rational, subtle distinction between the distinguishable, written elements of that poetical world is, in reality, turned into an unutterable jumble of "filth, stench, noyse." The idea returns in the neologism "merd-urinous," a compound chosen to describe the intrinsicably mixed quality of the waste found in the river, and in the invocation to _Alcides_ that is carelessly introduced by the poet after the conclusion of the introductory section. _Hercules_, the character beyond the patronymic, is indeed not entirely a _god_ or _goddess_, but a demigod, born of a human woman, _Alcmene_, and the god _Zeus_. This duality or even literal mixture, undescored by the reference to _Alcaeus_, his human grandfather, is then emphasized by the ambivalent way in which the poet lingers on the frail humanity of his "backe, and bones [_,_] sore" from his "former labors," while attributing to him an undisputable divinity.

> Thou hast seene _hell_ (some say) and know'st all nookes there,  
> Canst tell me best, how every _Furie_ lookes there,  
> And art a _god_, if _Fame_ thee not abuses,  
> Alwayes at hand, to aide the merry _Muses_.  

But this passage is remarkable for more than the simple repetition of the mixture motive: in this "confusion", like in the inextricablly _merd-urinous_ waters of the Fleet, the poet's forgetfulness ("me thinkes 'tis od, | that all this while I forgot some _god_") is actually enabling him to reingest the rhetorical material that he had just discarded, offering to the reader the exact same content that had been so scrupolously listed, denied and purged in the liminal space of the _proemium_. Even the same rhyme returns: accepting what "some say" and what _Fame_ has transmitted to him, the poet is in truth allowing the "_Muses_" to "abus[_e_]" both his and his reader's "faith". And indeed, in the murky waters of the Fleet all of this discarded epic material flows back to the poet, encroaching and soiling the setting, the adventure, and its characters. As the ship enters the "wombe" of the Fleet, the discarded epic flows back to it, in a mode that is "increasingly phantasmagoric and allegorical" [@Duncan-Jones2005, 261], and which parades "_Centaures_," "_Gorgons_," and a "_Chimaera_." Like "The slie _Ulysses_ [...] in a sheepes-skin," epic repossesses the poem, debasing the system of equivalences and positive replacements that had compelled both the author and the reader to wager on its success, and therefore corrupting the economical exactness of the transaction. 

Indeed, although in a different way, the ecosystem of the Fleet in the end seems to be comparable with "genuine criticism of Jacobean England" described by @Medine1975. Waste seems to have become an integral part of London's frantic consumption, which reached an unprecedented peak after the turn of the century, transforming "commercial transaction" into "a natural, inescapable phenomenon" [@Bruster 1992, 16]; the risk of underestimating this pervasive marketplace, Jonson seems to suggest, is the "confusion" of the Fleet, where what is discarded becomes inseparable from what is being bought. And indeed, even Medine's extension of this critique to the realms of science and literature seems eventually acceptable - science might have replaced superstitious ideas such as god and the soul, but _Mercurius_ and _Pythagoras'_ metempsychosis return in the Fleet, under the forms of Paracelus' medicine and Hill's theory of atoms. In a corrupt, clogged ecosystem like that of the Fleet, culture is irreplaceable, progress is impossible, and ideas that you seem to have discarded will eventualy flow back to you.
