#Books needed

##Revision (April 2015)

- __Murray__, Timothy: _Theatrical legitimation: allegories of genius in seventeenth century England and France_; Stacks: __PN2049 .M87 1987__

- Something on __waste__ produced by consumption. Something about the very idea of waste.

- Something on __ecosystem__: an operative definition that could work well.

- - -

##First version (March 2015)

1. Probably _Kristeva_ on __Abjection__ (either her or someone who's successfully summarizing what she says);

	- Powers of horror: an essay on abjection: Stacks - __PQ2607.E834 Z73413__

	- Pouvoirs de l'horreur: essai sur l'abjection: Milstein __PQ2607.E834 Z734 1980__ 

2. Ben Jonson: a description of the state in which he was when he published the __epigrams__;

	- There might be no __Cambridge Companion__ for BJ; but there is one _Donne to Marcell_. Find that, in case.

		- The Cambridge companion to Ben Jonson: _Stacks_ - __PR2631 .C35 2000__

	- "An Eagle's Wing and a Vulture's Wing: Poetic Journey and Wager Journey in Jonson's “Famous Voyage”" - . Ben Jonson Journal. Volume 15, Issue 1, Page 54-78, ISSN 1079-3453, May 2008
		
		- _Stacks_: __PR2631 .B464__

3. something about __foreign trade__ in Early Modern London (for the ships sent abroad and the ways in which people had to wage on them);

4. something about __consummerism__ in Early Modern London (for the quickness with which a new item is bought, and an old item is discharged - trying to describe the terms of this economical transaction will be __crucial__);

	- Ian Archer, _The Pursuit of Stability_, _Reserves_ __DA680 .A74 1991__
	- Robert Brenner, _Merchants and Revolution_, _Reserves_ __HF3520 L66 B74 1993__
	- Brouster, _Drama and the Market in the Age of Shakespeare_, _Reserves_ __PR658 E36 B78 1992__
	- Fisher, F.J., _London and the English Economy, 1500-1700_, _Reserves_ __HC 258.L6 F57 1990__
	- Peter, Clark, _The Cambridge Urban History of London, V. 2_, _Reserves_, __HT133.C25 2000__
	- Orlin, Lena, _Material London c. 1600_, _Reserves_, __DA 680.M38 2000eb__
	- Thirsk, Joan, _Economic Policy and Projects_, _Reserves_, __HC260.153 T48__

5. something about the state of the __Fleet__ - not banal; we might have to ask B. about this.

- Cockayne, E., _Hubbub : Filth, Noise & Stench in England 1600-1770_: _Reserves_, __RA485 .C62 2007__

- Barton, N. J. (Nicholas James)., _The Lost Rivers of London; a Study of Their Effects upon London and Londoners and the Effects of London and Londoners upon Them._

- We should try and grab something from the bibliography of the amazing Robinson:

	- Jenner, "From Conduit Community to Commercial Network? Water in London 1500-1725"

- - -

#Quotations

##Boehrer

- We can use __Boehrer__ to:

	1. criticize the simple denomination of __mock heroic__: the work that Jonson is doing is more subtle, and more ideologically - intellectually? literalily? - sound;

		- _collateral_: in fact, we should question the very implications of __mock heroic__ - how would it work as a genre? What sort of implications or expectations would it activate in a reader?

	2. talk about the problem of __genre__ - it occupies a __liminal__ space;

	3. ask the question - in the end, why is it _simply disgusting_? What animates our feeling of repulsion towards it?

> "The final poem in Ben Jonson's single book of _Epigrammes_ (c. 1612), "On the Famous Voyage" has presented readers with special problems relative to its form, context, and subject-matter. On the formal level, its massive length (at 196 lines, it is over four times as long as the second-largest poem in the collection) and mock-heroic narrative render questionable its presence within a \volume of epigrams. On the contextual level, its placement at the end of the _Epigrammes_ lends it a peculiar prominence which is further reinforced by its general failure to conform to the alternating encomiastic and condemnatory structure of the poems that precede it. And on the level of content, many (perhaps most) readers have found it simply disgusting.(9)

##Bruster

- We use __Bruster__ to talk about the pervasiveness of __market__ as a _mental_ and _physical_ (or _physiological_) category.

- _Rewrite Edit_: Bruster __should__ be introduced in any case; the paragraph where we discuss the idea of _consumption_ should probably be split in order to fully make sense of his contribution:

	- the _market_ is described as a pervasive __idea__, an __idea__ that starts affecting both an ideological and, in a way, a phisyological construction of human interactions. This is the basis of the __Voyage__: literary form echoes the corrupt echosystems embodied by the living organism of the city; the city as a __body__ and the city as a __book__;

	- crucial - these are the two latent notions concealed beyond the sustained metaphor of __the famous voyage__ - the __city as a book__ and the __city as a human body__; therefore, the corruption of the echosystem caused by the introduction of mass market and consumption, whose practices are mirrored by the activities taking place on the _Fleet River_ (cooking and tanning, the treatment of the dead animals becoming the perfect parallel for the waste and consumption produced in the entire city), are affecting the __body__ and the __soul__ of its inhabitants;

	- __city as a book__: Jonson the writer and editor; Jonson the tanner and the cook; ideologies that are broken, that ought to be discarded, flow back to their initial users and consumers;

	- __city as a body__: the __Fleet__ as the ecosystem where the __anus__ becomes the __mouth__.

> "Like the theater, the market took its first permanent roots during this period: the two "institutions," in fact, share a similar physical chronology." (5) "Like the citizen merchant and his wife, actors apparelled themselves for the business of selling commodities. One of the commonplaces connected with shopowners in the drama, in fact, held that they calculatingly dimmed the light in their shops to set the stage for retailing shoddy goods." (6) "Providing dramatic commodities for public consumption, the Renaissance theater functioned as an instituitonalized, profitable market." (8) "It is my intention in this study to begin the premise that the theater was, _a priori_, a market, that it was, primarily, a place of business - and, as a business, part of a complex of centralizing institutions. This need not imply that the playhouses were without a social vision." (10) "During the course of the century, however, sustained forces began affecting England's ecnomic foundations, ultimately transforming its society [...]. Figuring prominently among such influences were a continually high level of inflation, the extension and intensification of merchant adventurism and other speculative financial activity [...]; the material implications of international trade expansion; the rapid growth of London's population and the subsequent complications of urban pressure; and, perhaps most important, the progressive, structural institutionalization of the market economy." (12) "The period from 1580 to 1620 in particular became the focus of a variety of conflicting social pressures [...]" (13) "The distinctive character of Reinassance culture, in fact, traced its origin in large part to a unique, historically determined confluence of wealth, people, and material, a confluence which afforded England an unheralded period of artistic production." (14) "Yet the myth of dangerous market forces had strong roots in reality. Within the bars of the city as well as in the suburbs, as Breton's lament intimates, the market seemed to gain increasingly powerful sway over the lives of Londoners in the 1590s and early 1600s. The idea of buying and selling, of exchange for profit and socially approved surplus value took on heightened levels of significance in the two decades surrounding the turn of the century. In presenting commercial transaction as a natural, inescapable phenomenon, the market assumed an ever noticeable place in the foreground of urban life." (15) "the process of commodity evaluation comprised a significant measure of the Renaissance market's instrumental dynamics. In such a way the power of the market depended as much on its placelessness as on any permanent or periodic physical status. Indeed the market translated its force conceptually, acting as the annex through which monetary forces expressed - in Renaissance London and outside it - the energy of nascent capitalism. It did not so without complications. To Breton and Shakespeare, as to many of their contemporaries, in allowing money an ostensibly unprecedented, unrestrained latitude in the determination and characterization of urban relations, London's market functioned not only as a site of opportunity for retailing their literary works, but also as a dynamic locus of generous social change." (16)

##Burlison

- We use him because:

	1. he exposes the way in which Jonson's obsession for editorial control and practices coincides in fact with a general concern for the "market" and money;

		- _collateral_: should we use the expression "__anal__ personality" (only for teh lulz)?

		- _collateral_ (2) - unrelated: what about __Glutton__ and __Covetousness__ being two sides of the same vice?		

> "Furthermore, Jonson's own financial biography, his renowned commercial control over his published texts, the archival information that we possess about the expenditure that was lavished on the masques and entertainments on which he worked, his apparently autobiographical remarks in _Discoveries_ about the mockery that his own poverty had occasioned from certain accusers and enemies [...] - all make it difficult for us to fail to be alert to the financial contexts and concerns of his writings." (281) "What Knights believed Jonson was writing about, and moreover criticizing, was what he described as the 'acquisitive' society of his time: an emergent capitalism, marked by a growing 'money market', increased overseas trade and the rise of 'new men' and the social disruptions that accompanied these changes." (282) the origin of "consumer society" (283) "in other words, the proliferation of references to money in Jonson's plays, and the consequent presence of coins as props on the Jonsonian stage, should alert us of two things. First, they register the unprecedented importance that coins had in the lives of the people who would have attended Jonson's plays. [...] And second, such references remind us that transactions in money might actually have been seen as moments at which trust was required or called unto question [...] also because money itself bespoke (285) a true correspondence between an object and its value." (286)

##Cockayne

- We use her to talk about __shit__ becoming __food__; we use her to talk about the corrupt ecosystem of the __Fleet__.

- This should probably be our starting point - to introduce the notion of corrupt ecosystem, which we will later extend to the __city as a body__ and __the city as a book__.

- __Water__. I mean, we don't really talk enough about water - water as a deceptive boundary. Water as a deceptive way of getting rid of stuff - since stuff will __always__, inevitably, flow back to you.

> "Just a few hours separated meat that was stale from that only fit for dogs. Low profit margins in the victualling trades tempted people to make false claims about freshness." (95) "Pork was potentially a more dangerous product than beef; it deteriorated more quickly, and carried a great number of communicable diseases. [...] While rootling in the back alleys and dunghills, pigs picked up contamination from city industries and noisome ditches filled with night soil and street sweepings. Mingling with dogs increased the circulation of disease and intestinal worms. Pork from city pigs needed to be cooked thoroughly to ensure it did not cause illness or worm infestation. Some signs of poor quality were clearly visible." (95) "References to butchers selling unmarketable flesh abound in civic and company records. Vendors of corrupt meats could be fined and their produce confiscated. Dogs and pigs devoured some impounded supplies and the rest was disposed of." (96) "After 1648 the market lookers for flesh and fish were keen to discover carcasses affected by the 'turne'. The turne was a disease affecting sheep and cattle that made the beast 'turne about' while grazing. [...] It was thought that the disease could be transmissible to humans if infected meat was consumed, and therefore sales were banned and fines were relatively high for those found to be marketing meat with the turne." (97) "Rivers received a rich stew from the cities - from domestic and trade sources, particles of earth, soot, sand, turds and rainwater. Silty liquid arrived via street kennels and open ditches. A mall but increasing amount arrived via subterranean sewers. [...]" (199) "More solid particles of refuse were also cast into city rivers. Ordinary household waste could find its way into the waters: a notice was placed in the _Manchester Mercury_ warning people not to throw ashes, rubbish, dust, or dirt into the River Irwell. Most human excrement did not enter the basic sewage system because it was collected in cesspits [...]. Some privies were located above the Fleet." (200) "A strong belief in the harmful effects of bad airs - or miasmas - prevailed throughout the period. It was thought that the corrupt air itself caused and spread diseases when it was breathed in." (212)

##Donaldson2000

- __Donaldson__, Ian, _Jonson's Poetry_, in _The Cambridge Companion to Ben Jonson_, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000

- We use him to:

	1. support the idea of the __epigrams__ as a commercial product.

> "Though strongly drawn by the notion of coterie poetry and manuscript circulation, Jonson is even more powerfully attracted by the lure of print. The final destination of the _Epigrams_ is a printed book, an object that - unlike Donne's more vulnerable poetic manuscripts - would seemingly never perish." (123) "Jonson's booksellers were crucial agents in furthering his career as a professional writer. Jonson's strong distaste for the new print medium and for the booksellers's trade is nevertheless evident [...]" (121) "The poem reveals and celebrates a system of authorship, patronage, circulation, and esteem quite different from that promoted by the book trade." (122)

##Donaldson2011

- __Donaldson__, Ian, _Ben Jonson: A Life_, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011

- We use him to:

	1. remind the readers that Jonson had probably travelled on a journey economically very similar to the one attempted by the main characters of _The Famous Voyage_ - a "wager journey";

	2. remind the readers that Jonson had experienced something very similar to the ecosystem of the __Fleet River__ when he was young.

> "Jonson had responded with similar mock-heroic enthusiasm to a small boat journey that was taken along Fleet Ditch - at that time little more than an open sewer issuing into the Thames - by two enterprising travellers named Heydon and Sheldon. In his poem 'The Famous Voyage' Jonson compared these two adventurers with others of recent times" (31) [follows quotation from OtFV] The journeys to Norwich, Bristol, and Antwerp mentioned here are authenticated exploits of the day. It was the actor Will Kemp who danced the 130 miles from London to Norwich in February 1600, and published the account of his footwork, _Kemp's Nine Days' Wonder_, later the same year. (Danced at least some of the way - danced for three days out of the twenty-three that it finally took him to complete the journey, slowed down by bad weather and physical exhaustion.) The wherry journey to Bristol had been undertaken by Richard Ferris and two companions in 1590. [...] Those who 'put moneys on return | Fom Venice, Paris, or some inland passage' were wagering on their chances of successfully completing their journey within a given period of time. This was a popular sport of the day, but not without its hazard. Will Kemp had put out money on his marathon dance to Norwich in the expectation of a threefold return [...]" (32-34) "Jonson too may have wagered on his chances of walking successfully from London to Edinburgh and back." (34) "Hartson (or Christopher) Lane, the family's new place of residence, was a small lane running from the Strand through to the Thames. It was not a salubrious place to live. The 'great sewer' that ran down the centre of the lane was liable to overflow in bad weather, threatening both the health of the inhabitants and the foundations of the adjacent houses. This large open drain brought effluent of all kinds from St. Martin's Lane down into the Thames. Later in life Jonson was to memorialize the sights and (more particularly) smells of another great sewer, Fleet Ditch, in his mock-heroic poem 'On the Famous Voyage'. The poem may well be touched by memories of childhood adventures outside of his house in Hartshorn Lane, were, as at Holborn, the air was often [...]." Follow quotations from OtF "In 'The Famous Voyage' Jonson was to describe the stench that wafted from 'Bears' College' (as he ironically called the place), and from the barge that crossed the Thames daily with rotting meat to feed its learned inhabitants (_Epigrams_, 133.117-18)." (103)

##Duncan-Jones

- __Duncan-Jones__, Katherine, _City Limits: Nashe's 'Choise of Valentines' and Jonson's 'Famous Voyage'_, in _The Review of English Studies_, 56-224, April 2005

- How we use her: 
	
	1. still unclear. There is a lot that could be brought in for general patchwork, but nothing that exceptionally stands out. (Perhaps only worth just a note at the very beginning?)

	2. a general idea that could be useful - and that seems somehow latently active throughout the entire paper - is that of the poem as never reaching a conclusion, as getting stuck somewhere in-between - it is an anti-climatic poem on the idea of __blockage__; things getting stuck and flowing back to the reader / the eater / the consumer:

		- this is present in the notion of _choked sewer_, the irrational itinerary chosen by the travellers, the disappointing anti-climax of the ending, and the allegorical tone of the final part.

> "Jonson's poem, conversely, uses a drunken boat trip into the choked sewer that was London's Fleet Ditch to parody the journeys to the Underworld undertaken by the heroes of the _Odyssey_ and the _Aeneid_." (247) "Also, even by Jonson's own standards, the poem is discouragingly dense and elliptical." (248-249) The entire article seems to be about the relationship between Nashe and Jonson, and about the way in which Jonson's poem would be somehow inspired by a previous work by Nashe. Not very useful for our purposes. "And while Nashe uses pleasing techniques of fluid dilation, Jonson deploys frustrating strategies of blockage and obstruction." (258) "While Nashe's poem rises to a succession of climaxes, Jonson's promises epic fullness, but delivers bathos and anti-climax. Like Nashe's poem, Jonson's has a preliminary verse: 'On The Famous Voyage,' which is followed by 'The Voyage It Selfe.' These preliminary verses make it clear that the poem belongs to the still rather unusual genre of mock-heroic satire, announcing that the journey chronicled succeeds the 'bolder fables' of the Greeks as well as Virgil's account of Aeneas's journey to the Underworld." (258) "A tenuous analogy worthy of Shakespeare's Fluellen is drawn between the Thames boat hired by the poem's two adventurers and those used by classical epic heroes: 'Their wherry had no saile, too; ours had none.'" (258) On Shelton and Heyden: "Perhaps their obscurity, except among those readers who had drunk regularly with them at the Mermaid tavern, was part of the joke." (259) "Indeed, much about 'The Voyage' is appropriately muddy." (259) "To appreciate the absurdity of this itinerary we need to look at a map of pre-Fire London. Even quite drunk young men could stagger to Holborn from the Mermaid's large site between Bread Street and Friday Street in about twenty minutes." (260) "One of the poem's many crude jokes is its glorification of the courage and endurance of Shelton and Heyden, and its refusal to acknowledge that of the poor pair of scullers, 'horride knaves,' who do the actual rowing." (260) Is this really the case? "Their waterway is the Fleet Ditch. The small Fleet Brook, a tributary of the Thames, had long since ceased to be a pleasant stream. Despite repeated efforts to cleanse it during the previous years or more, it had become a sewer and rubbish dump carrying much of the waste material generated by Londoners." (260) "It gets worse. Though the oarsmen attempt to hold to the middle of the channel they suddenly encounter a monstrous 'liter' (lighter), a huge flat-bottomed barge used for carrying merchandise to and from ships in the Thames. This compels them to row directly beneath the outflow of the privies, where they are greeted by the sound of a monstrous 'crack' like thunder." (261) "The poem becomes increasingly phantasmagoric and allegorical." (261) "In epic terms, the cat corresponds with the hero's father, who rises three times from the infernal waves before giving prophetic utterance [...]." (262) "This penultimate couplet lends support to such critics as McRae who construe the poem as a satire on the civic ceremonial of the City of London." (262)

##Kristeva

> "The corpse (or cadaver: _cadere_, to fall), that which has irremediably come a cropper, is cesspool, and death; it upsets even more violently the one who confronts it as fragile and fallacious chance. A would with blood and pus, or the sickly, acrid smell of sweat, of decay, does not _signify_ death. In the presence of signified death - a flat encephalograph, for instance - I would understand, react, or accept. No, as in true theater, without makeup or masks, refuse and corpses _show me_ what I permanently thrust aside in order to live. These body fluids, this defilement, this shit are what life withstands, hardly and with difficulty, on the part of death. There, I am at the border of my condition as a living being. My body extricates itself, as being alive, from that border. Such wastes drop so that I might live, until, from loss to loss, nothing remains in me and my entire body falls beyond the limit - _cadere_, cadaver. If dung signifies the other side of the border, the place where I am not and which permits me to be, the corpse, the most signifying of wastes, is a border that has encroached upon everything. It is no longer I who expel, "I" is expelled. The border has become an object. How can I be without border?" (231) "The abject has only one quality of the object - that of being opposed to _I_. If the object, however, through its opposition, settles me within the fragile texture of a desire for meaning, which, as a matter of fact, makes me ceaselessly and infinitely homologous to it, what is _abject_, on the contrary, the jettisoned object, is radically excluded and draws me towards the place where meaning collapses." (230)

- Manous

> "the wager journey had long since established itself as a recognizable component of England's pervasive performance culture" (3) "The first thing to observe is that the central and most common feature of the wager-journey tradition was the practice of "putting out" money "upon return." (8) "Typically, one traveling on a wager gave or "put out" fixed sums of money to those betting _against_ his chances of having a successfully completed journey. If the journey was not completed and verified according to the terms of the wager, the traveler forfeited these sum; but, if the journey was successfully completed and verified (usually via the acquisition of certificates of one kind or another), the traveller was typically owed, upon his return home, a threefold to fivefold increase on the moneys he had put out." (8-9)

- McRae

> Good work of summarizing everything that has been said about this poem. ""On the Famous Voyage" emerges within this context as an ironic commentary on, and disruptive intervention in contemporary constructions of space. The poem interweaves strains of satire and saturnalia, as Jonson maps a journey through a grotesque urban body." "The infamously morose insistence on human excrement, I will argue, is enlivened by carnivalesque humour." "Trave, if it is to be endorsed, must therefore be represented in accordance with its controlling ethos." "Instead, given the number of other topical referents in the poem, it seems reasonable to suggest that the voyagers were personally known to the poet [...]." "As Jonathan Gil Harris has demonstrated, however, representations of the flow of water into London were always equivocal, as civic pride was shadowed by associations of fluidity with bodily incontinence." -> __VERY GOOD__ finding here. "As the heroes move upstream through the "dire passage" (l. 59), the poem moves haltingly through images of excretion to images of the preparation and consumption of food. The "passage" thus crudely mirrors the function of the alimentary canal, understood in Renaissance medical theory to be a single channel winding through the body, which received and digested food, and subsequently ejected excrement." "Theorists exercised their minds, as Gail Kern Paster notes, to separate the processes of the canal, but failed to dispel completely the "specter of monstrous appetite, of ingestion and excretion in endless, horrible simultaneity." ""Dock" is a suitably confused pun, suggesting the vagina but also the anus." "After the early imagery of degraded sexuality, the "Famous Voyage" in fact moves insistently towards a concentration on the city's processes of excretion and consumption. In accordance with the materializing strategy of the poem, Jonson roughly equates the "filth, stench, noyse" of the classical underworld (l. 9), with the unsanitary condition of the Fleet."

- Medine

> "These views rest on two important facts: that the poem is a mock epic and that it depends heavily on topical references for its effect. On the basis of these facts, I wish to argue here for a broader interpretation, that the real object of satire in "The Famous Voyage" is the age itself." (97) "At the same time, the pervasive topicality creates an impression of realism and inclusiveness, making the poem into an image of the times. Throughout, however, the poet has proceeded with great irony. So what he celebrates he actually exposes as preposterous and repugnant, thereby fulfilling the satirical intent: to amuse yet to offer genuine criticism of Jacobean England." (98) "Because the classics of Greece and Rome concern achievements which are no longer meaningful, a modern poet must update the traditional epic and celebrate virtue which is relevant to his contemporaries, Jonson therefore sings the "valour of the nose," a heroic indifference to what is foul and malodorous." (100) "[...] the two heroes represent the decline of literature and science. [...] By including such matters in his satire, Jonson thus calls attention to the moral and intellectual condition of the age." (100) Doubt between "Ralph Shelton" (praised and respected by BJ elsewhere) and "Thomas Shelton" (allegedly despised by BJ) as the referent of line 5. (100-101) For us, irrelevant: BJ is actually including HIMSELF among these heroes - he is a hero, braving this great threat. Same for Heydon (103 ff.). Some time spent on the destination of the voyage, with interesting conclusions. (104-105) "The destination was some tavern near the Holborn bridge, which was the base of operations for "madame Caesar." a noted procuress of the day. She is referred to as "MADAME CAESAR, great PROSERPINA" (l. 180), who presides over "grisly Pluto's hall" - the specific tavern or inn. (104) But since she is away, the "visit" proves fruitless and the heroes return "without protraction," a phrase which further suggests the illicit purpose of their visit to Hell. Summary: "Basing the narrative on the epic voyage and incorporating ancient mythology, Jonson thus establishes a framework of classical reference. "The Famous Voyage" obviously differs radically from traditional versions of the epic; the heroes of Homer and Virgil descend to the underworld to discover personal or national destiny, while Jonson's heroes journey to Hell to visit a brothel. Certainly the author is burlesquing literary pretentiousness, and lampoons Shelton and Heydon in particular. But [...] Jonson extends the criticism to society in general." (105)

- Miles

> "Jonson's contemporaries admired his masques; posterity found his highest achievement in the plays. There is no doubt, however, of Jonson's own order of priorities; by deliberating placing his _Epigrams_ at the head of the Folio, and by dedicating them to the Earl of Pembroke as 'the ripest of my studies', Jonson demonstrated his own conviction that his poems were more important than anything he had written for performance. Jonson was not unaware of the worth and significance of his plays and masques. But his experience of both these forms was fraught with constraints and tensions. [...] Only in his poetry was Jonson writing in a manner and form with which he felt entirely comfortable. And any claim to be among the great poets had to rest, in the final analysis, on poetry." (169) "The _Epigrams_ had originally been gathered together with a view to independent publication; they were licensed for issue in 1612 as a self-contained volume. When circumstances delayed their appearance, and the idea developed of issuing the Folio, they were incorporated in the larger work. The collection of epigrams, 133 short poems in all, each devoted to the examination of one central comment or conceit, is characterized by its integrity and sense of unity; there is an overall structure, albeit of a loose kind, and the pieces are put together in a way that gives the reader the sense of a full experience, with beginning, middle, and end." (170) "With the 1616 Folio Jonson brought his achievement to its peak, and carefully enshrined it in the form that he correctly estimated would outlast any other kind of monument. The lovely book that his printer eventually produced contained nine plays, nineteen masques and two collections of Jonson's poetry. Taken tohether, these form a staggering display of Jonson's range and power." (158) "In accordance with his aim, Jonson's presentation of his work throughout the Folio was rigidly controlled. He deliberately excluded anything he considered not consonant with the high level both of his best work and of the serious pretentions of the volume. Firmly discarded, for instance, were all the early or apprentice works; Jonson comes before his public with _Every Man in his Humour_ as a fully fledged dramatist, not perhaps at the level of mastery he is to attain, but evidently no novice." (159)

- Riddel

> "It may fairly be said that Ben Jonson was one of the most self-conscious of poets and also a man not noticeably plagued by self-doubt." (152) "Given, however, the extraordinary care that he must have devoted to the arranging of the parts of the Folio [...]. (153) "The portion of the Folio to which Jonson seems to have paid the closest attention is the poems, _Epigrams_ and _The Forest_. There are a couple of reasons for holding this view, based on physical evidence, the other on conjecture." (153-154) "The second, or conjectural, reason that I believe Jonson paid especially close attention to the printing of his poems in the Folio is his well-known characterization of them, the _Epigrams_ in particular, as "the ripest of my studies"; if there were a section of the volume that he would prefer to have made as nearly perfect as possible it would be this one." (154) "On the other hand, a number of typographical changes must have been introduced for the sake of uniformity itself." (156)

- Robinson

> "Early seventeenth-century England has long been associated with a pervasive disgust. [...] What no one seems to have noticed is that in one sense, at least, the years on either side of 1600 actually invented disgust." (553) Follows a whole discourse on the invention of the word "disgust"; it is a piece about etymology. "Descartes becomes the first philosopher to take disgust seriously, because disgust provides him with the physicalist model of aversion he needs for his associationist psycholohgy. He is accordingly interested in cases of a kind that concern Aquinas little if at all, as when we find something "very foul" in food we are eating "with pleasure" such that we are afterwards unable to think of that food without "_horreur_. [...] For Descartes, aversion is not the opposite of desire. It is a kind of desire." (554) Great! "Such aversion is nothing like the hatred or loathing that impels us to fly evil. What disgusts is precisely what we have once enjoyed, and it disgusts only because it has become too much, not because [555] it is fundamentally alien. The terrain of disgust is thus aesthetics or dietetics, not ethics or religion. It finds its place with "lower" senses like taste and smell, "lower" _techne_ like cooking, perfumery, cosmetics, diet, and purgation." (554-555) "Early modern usage seems to move in the opposite direction: the word's sensory meanings increase in frequency [...]. But at heart early modern usage refuses to draw a line between the most visceral bodily processes and the largest horizons of human action. In disgust, the sensory and the social come into being in intimate mutual relations. This is not a matter of the body politic: the body is itself political, and the experience of disaffection is lodged within it immediately, like the unsettled movements of a queasy stomach." (558) "In the pages that follow I will use _Poetaster_ and Jonson's final epigram, the "Famous Voyage," to show that the social topography of London is a vital context for a history of disgust, but also that the city scene challenges and complicates humanist discourse of taste and distaste. In both texts, Jonson shows how disgust works to produce new social identities. But he also calls attention to its paradoxes: the difficulty of distinguishing between tasteful refusals and poisoned palates; the strange pleasures that can attend even visceral revulsions." (563) "For modern readers the most famously disgusting scene of _Poetaster_ is almost certainly its climax, which stages the poetaster Crispinus's reform as a literal purge of bad language [...]. This purge is a materialized enactment of humanistic education: it is literary criticism at work, a whole humanist socioaesthetics concretized in a single, graphic act." (563) "The Jonson text that most intensely exploits the potential for disgust in city life is his last epigram, the "Famous Voyage." A mock-heroic narrative of a journey up Fleet Ditch from the Thames to Holborn, it is both a description of London's most notorious open sewer and a disgusting travesty of the epic descent to hell." (565) "The "Famous Voyage" traces an emerging social boundary in early modern London; through its parody of high poetic forms, it links that boundary to forms of humanist cultural capital. And by devoting itself to a sustained violation of the rules of taste, it probes the contradiction of any cultural identity founded on modes of distasted refusal." (566) Robinson sees the boundary set in _Famous Voyage_ as eminently __social__: "The poem strongly marks the difference of a "gentle" from a working London." (567) "This violation of the rules of disgust is mirrored by a violation of the rules of genre and decorum, as Jonson dresses up the lowest subject matter in the highest language and turns the epigram - a non-narrative form, he insisted - into the basis of a mock-heroic narrative." (567) "When the poem addresses "us / All, that are the readers," it singles out the basis of humanist identity, linking it to its own parodic mode: parody, after all, depends on knowledge. This literate "we" is implicitly separated from the working world the poem describes, creating a community of disgust that includes Jonson, the voyagers, and the reader, but excludes the cooks, clerks, carters, and prostitutes for whom, presumably, the Ditch is only a given element of daily life, not the material of either epic or mock-epic, and certainly not a place to be explored on a dare." (567) "The poem stakes its claim on our attention on the suggestion that, for those who have internalized the discriminations of an urbane socioaesthetics, there is a kind of pleasure to be derived from violating them." (567) "Despite the efforts of a few critics to discern a satirical agenda in the "Famous Voyage," the poem seems most obviously just to be about the filth it describes. There is nothing like an agenda, nothing like a critique, not really even a message." (568) Final words about BJ: "The kind of ironic performance Jonson offers in the "Famous Voyage," with its invitation to enjoy the experience of disgust, its suggestion that there may always be pleasure in disgust, its suggestion that there may always be pleasure in disgust, makes little sense in the terrain of loathing sketched by Augustine." (569) Impossible to resist this: "And yet in the lines that follow we can see fragments of this broken allegory, as Jonson repeatedly evokes forms of monstruous femininity: he imagines London as a grotesque female body with the Ditch a filthy channel into it, like Error's "hellish sinke" ambiguously mouth, vagina, and anus [...]." "But Jonson equivocates with Martial's distictions by giving us centaurs that are really car-men and gorgon and harpies that are really scolds, conspicuously inappropriate equivalences that display the gap between the language he uses and the world he describes. The result is a product of subtraction, as first allegory, then metaphor, and finally poetic diction are all emptied out. The "Famous Voyage" evacuates poetic meaning, as the verse paragraph that began with the quasi-allegorical monster Mud ends with a simple act of naming: "Kate Arden" [...]." (572)

- Stow

> "“whereas in times past the course of water, running at London under Oldborne bridge and Fleete bridge into the Thames, had been of such breadth and depth, that ten or twelve ships navies at once, with merchandise, were wont to come to the foresaid bridge of Fleete, and some of them to Oldborne bridge: now the same course, by filth of the tanners and such others, was sore decayed; also by raising of wharfs; but especially, by a diversion of the water made by them of the new Temple, for their mills standing without Baynardes Castle, in the first year of King John, and divers other impediments, so as the said ships could not enter as they were wot, and as they ought” (70-71) “much money being therein spent, the effect failed, so that the brook, by means of continual encroachments upon the banks getting over the water, and casting of soilage into the stream, is now become worse cloyed and choken than ever it was before” (Stow 73).

- Thirsk

> "A substantial number of projects supplied consumer goods that could never be deemed essential to life. As imports they had been much more severely frowned on officially than hemp, flax, oil, and portable ovens. Even when they began to be produced at home, they were still considered to be frivolous and unnecessary, unfit to occupy the labours of honest Englishmen. However, their manufacture at home halted the drain of bullion, they provided much work, and, because of public demand, they persisted." (78) "The goods which came on to the market in greater quantity than ever before as a result of projects promoted the growth of a consumer society." (106)
