---
title: 'The _Discharge_ of Epic: Material and Cultural Waste in the Dysfunctional Ecosystem of _The Famous Voyage_'
author: G. E. Saretto
date: March 9th, 2015
bibliography: voyage.bib
---

_The Famous Voyage_ surprises the reader who approaches it for the first time. It the last poem in Ben Jonson's _Epigrammes_, a collection completed around 1612 and published for the first time along his other _Works_ in the folio of 1616. The one hundred thirty-two poems which precede it are consistently non-narrative and concise; they usually isolate and describe a recognizable public person, or a distinct social typology, and then describe his or her individual flaws or merits, as if they were available outside of time and space. Although the streets of London are clearly the setting where many of these satirical or literary types were first found and studied (some of them, like Cavalier Shift, are in fact explicitly shared with city plays such as _Every Man Out of His Humor_), it is only with this final adventure, an exploration of the Fleet Ditch by two unlikely heroes, that the urban environment becomes eventually visible and even symbolically predominant. It is in fact through the description of its dysfunctional ecosystem, formally mirrored by the structure of the text, that the poet meditates on the cultural and material degradation of his age.

The true protagonist of _The Famous Voyage_, as we soon discover, is its very specific urban setting: the Fleet Ditch and its nearest surroundings. Although the first London toponyms appear quite late in the poem, as a double reference to the "_Bread-streets_ Mermaid" (l. 37) in Cheapside, where the journey begins, and to "_Hol'borne_" (l. 38), where it will supposedly end, a pronominal allusion to the Fleet is incorporated immediately after the introduction of "_Shelton_" and "_Heyden_" (l. 5), the main human presences in the narrative. If the two fellows are equated to renowned warriors of Homeric, Ovidian, and Virgilian tradition, the Fleet constitutes the "one" setting where all that the same tradition has boasted about the four infernal rivers - "_Styx_, [...] _Acheron_, | _Cocytus_, _Phlegeton_" - is "prov'd" authentic (l. 7-8). The city stream becomes the pivotal character of this triad of actors, the "one" element which can provide the other two with a chance of surpassing the canon of antiquity: the necessary foil used to establish the magnitude of the adventure, and the valor of its heroes, is a genuinely hellish environment.

And the Fleet was undoubtedly hellish. By the time in which John Stow was writing his nostalgic _Survey of London_, published in 1598, the stream was no longer the broad and efficient waterway of yore, capable, as he recollects, of carrying "ten or twelve ship navies at once" [@Stow 44]. The Fleet had instead become the narrow ditch full of "filth, stench, noyse" which _The Famous Voyage_ describes (l. 9): a nauseatingly infamous landmark in Early Modern London, and a worrying indicator of the increasing environmental degradation caused by the unprecedented residential and commercial expansion of the period. It was not an isolated case; Ben Jonson himself used to live next to a very similar open sewer, a large artificial waste drain, when he was a boy, in Christopher Lane; according to Ian @Donaldson2011, the unforgettable olfactory and visual impressions associated to that overflowing stream of liquid garbage, registered as a child, later constituted the imaginative core of the scatological _Voyage_ (103). But there was something particularly admonitory about the Fleet, which Jonson attentively thematizes in his poem: an exemplary continuity between trade and pollution, generated by a mismanagement of waste.

Like the insalubrious canal running in the middle of Christopher Lane, the Fleet was a site of waste disposal; but, unlike the heterogeneous "effluent of all kinds" [@Donaldson2011 103] collected by the artificial sewer of Jonson's childhood, the contaminants found in the river had, in most cases, a definite origin. Quoting from a parliament record composed in the early XIV century, John Stow lists three historical reasons for its decay: the "filth of tanners and such others," the "raising of wharfs," which progressively narrowed the capacity of the waterway, and a "diversion" of its flow, produced to bring water to the mills of Baynard's Castle. The writer then explains how the latter two problems were supposedly tackled during the following decades, although the river "was never brought to the old depth and breadth" [@Stow 44]; but nothing is said about what happened to the "tanners and such others." In fact, despite the repeated attempts at cleansing the brook, accurately reported by Stow, these "such others" - workshops, kitchens, and their pollution - apparently never moved from the Fleet, thus causing the environmental degeneration described by Jonson's _Voyage_.

The contamination and waste produced by these shops was abundant and tenacious. John Stow ends his first description of the Fleet by lamenting how the "casting of soilage into the stream" had contributed to the brook becoming "worse cloyed and choken than ever it was before" [@Stow 45]. As Emily Cockayne recounts, the most resistant and toxic components of this thick "soilage" were probably those produced by the activity of slaughterhouses, tanners, dyers, butchers, cooks, and soap-makers, who manufactured and sold their products on the banks of the ditch. Together with a vast quantity of organic matter of animal origin, lively versified by Jonson as he describes how "The sinkes ran grease, and haire of meazled hogs, | The heads, houghs, entrailes, and the hides of dogs" (ll. 145-146), these trades also polluted the waters with "Whale, olive and rape oils," and with the byproducts resulting from "boiling together lime, ashes and fats" [@Cockayne2007 199-202]. Generating foul waste was an essential consequence for each of these processes; the craftsmen of the neighborhood manufactured their goods by separating what could be preserved from what had to be discarded. Thrown in the river, the discards would then become an integral part of the ecosystem of the Fleet.

Although apparently anachronistic, the notion of "ecosystem" seems pertinent to understanding the complexity of Jonson's treatment of the Fleet. Introduced in the 1930s, today the term is used to designate

> Any unit that includes all of the organisms (i.e., the community) in a given area interacting with the physical environment so that a flow of energy leads to clearly defined trophic structure, biotic diversity, and material cycles (i.e. exchange of materials between living and non-living parts) within the system. [@Gorham2011]

This definition relies on two interdependent ideas which, in _The Famous Voyage_, are consistently examined and questioned in relationship to the mismanagement of waste: "cycle" and "boundary." The interaction between these two concepts - the material, biological, and alimentary self-sufficiency of a _cycle_ and the relative porousness of the _boundaries_ enclosing it - informs an ecosystem. Like the Fleet and its surroundings, most of the ecosystems quoted in the rest of this definition revolve around a specific water supply, like "a wetland, a stream or lake, or - in the most logical case - a watershed within a sealed geological basin" [@Gorham2011]. The relative isolation that characterizes this last example is crucial for our purpose: the quintessential ecosystem, "the most logical case," is the one where the difference between the physical inputs and outputs entering or leaving the _cycle_ is minimized by a set of _boundaries_ that are almost impenetrable; in other words, one where matter is seldom truly discarded, and instead constantly reused. This is the case of waste in _The Famous Voyage_.

Jonson's poetical meditation on waste as the core of the degraded ecosystem of the Fleet implicitly alludes to two similitudes, that of the city as a human body and that of the city as a book, used by Early Modern writers to address the developing complexity of urban spaces, and of London in particular. We will for now focus on the first analogy, whose history was suggestively traced by Lawrence Manley as a specifically feminine trajectory, leading from a maternal or desirable body to an unfamiliar and monstrous one [@Manley1995 125-167]. The site which serves as the background of _The Famous Voyage_ relates, predictably, to the second category: Benedict Robinson, for instance, explains how the poem turns London into a "grotesque female body with the Ditch a filthy channel into it, [...] ambiguously mouth, vagina, and anus" [@Robinson2014 569]. Leaving gender aside, this grotesque metamorphosis becomes even more relevant to the environmental degradation of the ditch and its waste if we consider that the portion of the brook explored by Jonson's adventurers had the special privilege - apparently unique at the time - of hosting "many a privie" (l. 73) on its banks: here human ejections would therefore be intentionally conveyed into the waters of the stream, to become part of its bounded material cycle [@Cockayne2007 200]. Waste corresponded to shit, both in a figurative and in a literal sense: if the metonymy transformed the city into a human body, then the Fleet inevitably became its excretory system.

But it is precisely as it establishes and expands on this correspondence that the imaginative organization of _The Famous Voyage_ most surprises the reader. As Andrew Mcrae has convincingly demonstrated, the leading motive of this exploration of the Fleet is the river's assimilation to "the alimentary canal, understood in Renaissance medical theory to be a single channel winding through the body, which received and digested food, and subsequently ejected food" [@McRae1998]. One of the most suggestive inventions of the poem, then, is that for which we follow the travelers along an unorthodox route, from anus to mouth, moving "haltingly through images of excretion to images of the preparation and consumption of food" [@McRae1998]. Summoned by this inversion, the first "ugly monster" (l. 61) of the narrative, encountered at the outlet of the Ditch, "_Bride-well_" (l. 42), functions as a Rabelaisian embodiment of the massive amount of excrement expelled through this "dire passage" (l. 59).

> In the first jawes appear'd that ugly monster,  
> Ycleped _Mud_, which, when their oares did once stirre,  
> Belch'd forth an ayre, as hot, as at the muster  
> Of all your night-tubs, when the carts doe cluster,  
> Who shall discharge first his merd-urinous load:  
> (ll. 61-65)  

The "load" that is here emitted (in the form of "an ayre") and discarded (as "merd-urinous") figuratively equates the collective waste produced by the entire population of London, to which the personal adjective "your" (l. 64) alludes: to appreciate its odor and heat, the public is asked to imagine a collection of night soil so copious as to cause a state of urban congestion, paralyzing the "carts" transporting its piles [probably not an uncommon sight in the Early Modern capital, as explained by @Cockayne2007, 183-187]. Still navigating the watercourse, we then discover that this hyperbolic mass of ordure is, in most cases, intentionally induced by the inhabitants of the neighborhood, who are prompted to ingest "spirits, [...] pills, and [...] potions" (ll. 101-102) to purge their bodies, "in shitten sort" (l. 98), from the unhealthy meals that constitute their daily diet. So that finally, as we ascend the last portion of the alimentary canal, this same adulterated food eventually becomes the focus of the expedition. 

The section of the poem concerning the "hot cookes" of "_Fleet_-lane" (l. 144) in fact coincides with the discovery of the culinary habits practiced on the river, which are everything but salubrious. The incessant contamination of food on the ditch is in particular associated with two related problems: the ubiquitous presence of pestiferous particles in the area, registered by the poet in the lines immediately preceding these, and the alarming practices of recycling which are associated to the processing of meals. The first issue happens on an atomic level, involving invisible fragments of waste which, within the bounded environment, imbue every liquid and gaseous substance, and encrust every solid surface:

> Whether it languishing stucke upon the wall,  
> Or were precipitated down the jakes,  
> And, after, swom abroad in ample flakes,  
> Or, that it lay, heap'd like an usurers masse,  
> All was to them the same, they were to passe,  
> (ll. 136-140)

The adventurers of _The Famous Voyage_ inhale these particles through their nostrils, almost automatically, by leaving them "open, and un-armed" (l. 135): as Cockayne (212) reminds us, the aerial infectiousness associated to analogous "miasmas" was especially dreaded at the time. But by juxtaposing this permeating model of contagion with the preparation and consumption of food recounted in the rest of the section, the poet seems to suggest that the inhabitants of the area can absorb toxic substances in other ways - by consuming products that have been exposed to these fumes, for instance, or by cooking and eating animals that have fed on adulterated meat and water [again a common concern, as outlined by @Cockayne2007, 95-97]. Besides, in addition to this microscopic and involuntary infection, the second issue reported by Jonson introduces a deliberate and macroscopic one, enclosing the alimentary cycle of the ecosystem within a disturbingly auto-trophic boundary.

> Cats there lay divers had beene flead, and rosted,  
> And, after mouldie growne, againe were tosted,  
> Then, selling not, a dish was tane to mince 'hem,  
> But still, it seem'd, the ranknesse did convince 'hem.  
> For, here they were throwne in with'the melted pewter,  
> Yet drown'd they not. They had five lives in future.  
> (ll. 149-153)  

As we will see, the "five lives" which conclude this passage have a mythological connotation. From a purely material standpoint, however, the figure can also refer to the inexhaustible quality of this resilient nourishment: the text counts four explicit deaths (roasting, toasting, mincing, and either flaying or drowning), but we might easily predict how being "throwne" into the Fleet might provide the feline carcasses with endless opportunities to be consumed again and again, either "melted," like the alloy, with the infernal fluid of the ditch, or devoured - and excreted - by the animals bred or seized along its banks. Nothing is discarded from the bounded cycle of this ecosystem. The revelation of this scatological _Voyage_, awaiting both the adventurers and the readers who reach its end, is that the two extremities of its alimentary canal are shockingly adjacent. Although the thematic shift from excretion to consumption observed by McRae is still discernible, the purpose of the conclusion seems that of displaying the revolting continuity between sustenance and feces.

The specter of coprophagy haunts the final section of _The Famous Voyage_. It is a material and a cultural specter. As Mary Douglas explains in her anthropological meditation on _Purity and Danger_, public rituals involving the boundaries of human corporeality and its excretions manifest a symbolic equivalence between the organisms of discrete bodies and that of the society to which they belong [@Douglas1966, 114-128]. If individual anatomical margins correspond to shared social margins, then the biological discharges of a single physical person can symbolize the ideological discards of an entire community. Her notion of "social pollution" clarifies the meaning of collective taboos stating, for instance, that the matter "issuing from the body is never to be re-admitted," or articulating anxieties about the danger of "anything which has once emerged gaining re-entry" [@Douglas1966, 122-123]. These injunctions define the control that should be exerted over an open ecosystem, both somatic and mental: the cycle within it should differentiate between input and output, and then dispose of its intellectual and material waste. But the cycle of _The Famous Voyage_ is instead deleteriously obstructed and coprophagous; the boundaries of the body which it metonymically signifies, those of a monstrous London, are also threatened in their social and cultural regulation. To express this ideological decay, which is then extended to his responsibilities as a writer, Jonson introduces a second urban analogy: that of the city as a book.

The historical and literary identity of this similitude is more fragmented. We can find its principles in the correspondence between written and spatial units which models Stow's chorography [@Manley1995 158-167], or in the creative textualization of urban experiences inspiring pamphlets such as Dekker's _The Wonderfull yeare_ [@Twyning1998 8-10]. By adapting its rhetorical qualities and poetical choices to the urban landscape which it describes, _The Famous Voyage_ certainly suggests a similar equivalence. Nevertheless, the premises for this verbal reproduction of a concrete physical circumstance  - in this case the sealed ecosystem of the Fleet - are actually found in another notorious episode of disgust invented by Jonson himself: the "literal purge of bad language" [@Robinson2014 563] of _Poetaster_. Written around the summer of 1601, approximately eleven years before the completion of the _Epigrammes_, the comedy concludes its plot with an unusual pedagogical treatment. In the presence of Caesar and Virgil, Horace, the archetypal satirist, administers to Crispinus, the incompetent versifier of the title, a fistful of "somewhat bitter [...], but very wholesome" (ll. 396-397) pills. As soon as the medicine works its effect, the patient starts moaning loudly.

> __Crispinus__. [_Groaning_] O -  
> __Tibullus__. How now, Crispinus?  
> __Crispinus__. O, I am sick -  
> __Horace__. A basin, a basin, quickly; our physic works. [_To Crispinus_] Faint not, man.  
> [HORACE _holds a basin into which_ CRISPINUS _appears to vomit his words._]  
> __Crispinus__. O - _retrograde_ - _reciprocal_ - _incubus_.  
> __Caesar__. What's that Horace?  
> __Horace__. [_Looking in the basin_] _Retrograde_, _reciprocal_ and _incubus_ are come up.  
> (ll. 455-463)  

The comical effect of the scene is achieved through the assimilation of Latinate terms to weighty solid objects, in a conflation of cultural and material nourishment, pollution and illness that anticipates the tone of the scatological expedition through the Fleet. The eccentric vocabulary that has infected Crispinus [commonly identified as a parody of Marston's style, as in @Cain1995, 25-27] has to be expelled from his organism, like a poisonous meal, and replaced by the "strict and wholesome diet" (l. 524) of authoritative readings which Virgil later devises for him. The image of literature as food is canonical; the playwright's innovation is in the semantic richness, and graphic vehemence, with which the ingestion causes first intoxication, then constipation, and finally sickness. Indicated as a mass of "filth" (l. 484) clogging the _Poetaster_'s stomach, words have to be literally purged from his alimentary canal; in a similar fashion, then, Jonson opens _The Famous Voyage_ with a discharge of epic from the body of his poem.

Two editorial peculiarities characterize the opening of _The Famous Voyage_, indicating to the reader both the uniqueness of the poem against the rest of the collection and the aesthetic connotations of its first rhetorical gesture: the first is the presence of two distinct headings, one for the exordium (_On the Famous Voyage_) and one for the body of the text (_The Voyage Itself_); the other is the dense frequency and idiosyncratic use of italicized nouns. The consequence of the two headings is the creation of a differentiated liminal space, a textual boundary, where the poet can assert a separation between the actual organism of the composition (_Epigramme CXXXIII_ itself) and its surroundings, either those constituting the audience's memory of an analogue literary tradition, or those established by the physical volume containing the writer's works. The insistence on italics [in which Ben Jonson took particular care, as demonstrated by @Riddell2000, 156] is instead reminiscent of the literary cleansing of _Poetaster_. Here too the typographical mark denotes terms that, like the abstruse idioms in Crispinus' speech, can acquire weight, and therefore be treated - or mistreated - like tangible objects operating within a physical environment. Both the double heading and the presence of italics, then, contribute to the enactment of another linguistic purge.

> __On the Famous Voyage__  
>   
> NO more let _Greece_ her bolder fables tell  
> Of _Hercules_, or _Theseus_ going to _hell_,  
> _Orpheus_, _Ulysses_: or the _Latine Muse_,  
> With tales of _Troyes_ just knights our faiths abuse:  
> We have a _Shelton_, and a _Heyden_ got,  
> Had power to act, what they to faine had not.  
> (1-6)  

By comparing the initial six lines of the proem with the bold declaration which begins the _The Voyage It Selfe_ - "I Sing" (l. 21) - the reader realizes that the function of the italic font is to mark terms for deletion, or - better - for ejection. With the exception of "_Shelton_" and "_Heyden_", the two champions of the adventure, these nouns, clasped by the double negation "NO" (l. 1) and "not" (l. 6), constitute a list of every element that the poet has resolved "not" to sing about, or "not" to include in the body of his composition. Although suggestive of an _occupatio_ - a denial to indulge in the narration of events that the same denial is in fact contradictorily relating - these allusions do not reveal anything about the characters and places which they mention: the referents are evoked for the sole purpose of being discarded, paralleling the paradoxical articulation of banned words which increased the comical effect of _Poetaster_'s emetic cure. In the detached space of the journey's exordium, this purge serves as the regulation of the formal boundary that encloses the textual ecosystem of _The Famous Voyage_: an expulsion which incorporates the proper names of classical heroes ("_Hercules_," "_Theseus_," "_Orpheus_," "_Ulysses_"), the mention of a single, unspecified "_Latine Muse_," and three toponyms ("_hell_," "_Greece_," and "_Troyes_"). The sum of these names implies the vast mass of literary matter ejected not only from the poem, but also from the book for which it was written.

Indeed, as the rear end of Jonson's _Epigrammes_ [which was licensed for an autonomous publication in 1612, as recorded in @Miles1990, 170], the proem to _The Famous Voyage_ doubles as the performance of a vaster expulsion, separating the contents of the book from any work that, for aesthetic reasons, could not be included in it. Even at the moment of its actual publication, in the folio containing the assorted _Workes_ of 1616, the collection assumed a liminal position, separating the plays from the compositions "of divers nature, | and matter congested" found in _The Forrest_ and _Under-woods_ (where we read this definition, in _To the Reader_, ll. 3-4). With very few exceptions, the _Epigrammes_ are instead homogeneous in their realistic content, in most cases satirical or encomiastic, and in their recognizable form, typically short and witty. Understandably, then, the genre expelled in this exordium has to be their exact opposite. The country of "_Greece_" and the city of "_Troyes_," which open and close the sequence of discarded nouns, correspond to a cultural and literary synecdoche confirmed by each name on the list: that of the "bolder fables" of epic, fanciful and long-winded. By excluding the old, counterfeit forms which "our faiths abuse," the author is trying to conform to the formal requisites of his collection, and to purify the rhetorical ecosystem of the poem itself.

But, as we have seen, nothing can be truly discarded in the ecosystem of _The Famous Voyage_. Although in the first few lines of _The Voyage It Selfe_ the writer's vessel manages to steer away from the discarded waste of classical epic, initially restricting his inter-textual allusions only to the romance of "King _Arthurs_ table" (l. 24), the load ejected in the exordium starts flowing back to the adventurers as soon as they approach the entrance to the ditch, "_Bride-well_" (l. 42). Here the poet suddenly realizes how "'tis od | That all this while [_he has_] forgot some _god_ | Or _goddesse_ to invoke" (45-46): addressed to Hercules, the invocation that then follows echoes elements of the introductory purge almost verbatim.

> _Alcides_, be thou succouring to my song.
> Thou hast seene _hell_ (some say) and know'st all nookes there,  
> Canst tell me best, how every _Furie_ lookes there,  
> And art a _god_, if _Fame_ thee not abuses,  
> Alwayes at hand, to aide the merry _Muses_.  
> (50-54)

Distinguished by the same typographic mark, the names of "_hell_" and of the "_Muses_" return into the body of the text, again signifying, through synecdoche and metonymy, the two sides of the rejected genre which the author had resolved to resist - a mythical, or fanciful, content (the "_hell_" visited by the demigod, as "some say"), and its expression through an old form (the one sung by the "_Muses_"). The two nouns are even connected to the same rhyming verbs, "tell" (here an internal rhyme) and "abuses" (here a third person singular, to match the plural name). Mirroring the environmental degradation of the Fleet, which, as we have seen, is here presented as alarmingly obstructed and coprophagous, the poem is thus ingesting the same matter that it had initially expelled, in an unpleasant repetition that is accentuated by the redundant feminine rhyme of "nookes there" and "lookes there." From this point until its conclusion, and especially after having entered the dark, turbid "wombe" (66) of the ditch, the _Voyage_ will parade an increasing accumulation of "_Centaures_," "_Gorgons_," and "_Harpyes_" (68-69). Encroaching the setting, soiling the adventure and its characters, feeding discarded verses and expressions to the reader, epic, like "The slie _Ulysses_ [...] in a sheepes-skin" (113), repossesses _Epigramme CXXXIII_, and the collection to which it belongs.

The formal reproduction of the Fleet's bounded cycle, through the subtlety of this rhetorical gesture, is perhaps the most revolting feature of a poem that "many (perhaps most) readers have found [...] simply disgusting" [@Boehrer2002 9]. As reintroduction follows expulsion, the reader eventually perceives how a perfectly sealed ecosystem, when its ability to regulate the ejection of waste is obstructed, becomes indistinguishable from its contrary - a completely porous one; a dysfunctional boundary, even when impenetrable, is equivalent to an absent boundary. In this circumstance the collective threat symbolically attached to the violation of bodily margins, and defined by Douglas as a form of "social pollution," reaches an extreme that we could instead identify with Julia Kristeva's notion of the "abject." As she theorizes in _The Powers of Horror_, the unexpected disintegration of the individual boundaries defining the self, experienced as a sudden sense of contiguity with "wastes" such as "body fluids, [...] defilement, [...] shit," eventually produces a fall from the order of language and society into a prelinguistic state, "the place where meaning collapses" [@Kristeva2002 229-231]. This collapse is not extraneous to the material and cultural degradation of _The Famous Voyage_. On the one hand, as we have seen, Jonson expresses it through the figurative assimilation of verbal and literary artifacts - the ejected words of epic - to the concrete physical matter that poisons and clogs the ditch. On the other, he presents its consequences by revealing a problematic oscillation between the material assertions of contemporary science and the spiritual claims of ancient religion.

The oscillation between materialism and spiritualism is exemplified by the poet's use of three classical figures, whose involvement punctuates the three sections of the journey through the ditch. These are "_Alcides_" (l. 50), or Hercules, who is invoked at the beginning of the expedition and right before the meeting with the initial monster (_Mud_, l. 62); "_Mercury_" (l. 96), whose voice is heard while the adventurers sail next to "the second Prodigie" (l. 79), a reeking barge compared to "_Hydra_" (l. 83); and finally "_Pythagoras_", who is introduced in juxtaposition to "_Bankes_ the juggler" (l. 155), the spirit possessing the talking cat of the finale. We have already noticed how the first of these references, the homage to Hercules, opens the way to the return of the discharged epic matter into the poem - and this choice is not casual. The hero is a hybrid, born of a human, Alcmene, and a god, Zeus. This duality is in fact underscored by the poet, who names him through the patronymic _Alcides_, thus alluding to his mortal grandfather Alcaeus, while he reminds the reader both of his alleged divinity ("And art a _god_, if _Fame_ thee not abuses," l. 53) and of the frail humanity betrayed by his "backe, and bones [...] sore" from his "former labors" (ll. 55-56). Developing from this preliminary integration of old fiction with contemporary skepticism, this ambivalence is then intensified in the equivocal treatment of _Mercury_ and _Pythagoras_.

The patron god of messengers and the mystic philosopher from Samos are introduced in a similar fashion. Both characters are associated to a combination of scientific knowledge and religious beliefs; both are compared to modern counterparts; both originate relatively long monologues (the first one presented by the same deity, the second by his double _Bankes_) that lament the foul degradation of their present setting. But as we try to determine their cultural affiliation, locating them along an ideological trajectory extending from spiritualism to materialism, we realize that their roles are different. _Mercury_'s entrance performs a sudden restoration of mythological meaning to a word that, like the italicized terms ejected during the rhetorical purge, had initially simply conveyed a sense of material weight, in this circumstance associated to the homonymous metallic element (Hg). An unexpected _deus ex machina_, he "downe fell, _ab excelsis_" (l. 95), together with the laxatives bearing his name and the evacuations which they induced. His first words, then, are an outcry against "_Paracelsus_, | and all his followers, that had so abus'd him: | And, in so shitten sort, so long had us'd him" (l. 96-98). This is a denunciation of the way in which modern science has turned the god and his designation into a tangible commodity (used for "spirits, [...] pills, [...] potions, | Suppositories, cataplasmes, and lotions," ll. 101-102), thus forcing him to participate in the bounded scatological cycle of the Fleet's ecosystem. The allusion to _Pythagoras_, on the other hand, confers a disconcerting sense of authority, both religious and scientific, to the same bounded cycle. Incorporating the esoteric doctrine of metempsychosis into the physical framework of atomic theory, here outlined as the genealogy connecting "old _Democrite_" to a contemporary intellectual, "_Hill Nicholas_" (l. 128), the reference manifests how ancient faith, occasionally identified with superstition, can survive within new, allegedly authentic, perceptions of reality.

The miracle of the talking cat, whose ominous speech closes the expedition, is explained as a combination of old spiritual beliefs and new materialist convictions. However, as we have seen, the interaction between human and nonhuman bodies, either dead or alive, is propelled, in the physical ecosystem of _The Famous Voyage_, by the activity of the butchers and cooks who prepare and sell their adulterated products on the banks of the ditch. Analogously, the debasement of _Mercury_, turned into the active principle of purgative medicaments, is caused by the demands and rules of the market (of which, it is worth remembering, the deity was also a protector). Trade governs and even originates the dysfunctional cycle described by the poem. It causes material contamination by contributing to the perennial obstruction of the ditch, and it propagates infection by prompting the reuse of its own waste. To understand the cultural and symbolic implications of this alarmingly coprophagous activity, we have alluded to Mary Douglas' theory of "social pollution" and to Julia Kristeva's idea of the "abject." But these anthropological and psychoanalytic notions can also be applied to the immaterial body of beliefs through which commerce, as an abstract structure, was pervading the ideological ecosystem of Jonson's age, threatening the integrity of stable boundaries and incessantly portending a fall into a prelinguistic state of infernal "confus[_ion_]" (10), similar to that which characterized the Fleet.

In the introduction to his book on _Drama and the Market in the Age of Shakespeare_, Douglas Bruster effectively summarizes the increasing pervasiveness of commercial ideology in Early Modern London, where ideas "of buying and selling" and "of exchange for profit" were progressively being perceived "as a natural, inescapable phenomenon" that "assumed an ever noticeable place in the foreground of urban life" [@Bruster1992 15]. We are also aware of the extraordinary impact that these new attitudes had on Jonson and his writings, whose manifest or latent purpose was often that of investigating the unprecedented intensity - or fickleness - of consumerist persuasions [@Burlison2010 281-286]. In his early comedy _Every Man out of His Humour_ (1599), for instance, the playwright epitomizes the everlastingly shifting character of urban fashion by contrasting the flamboyant habits of the quintessential gallant, Fastidius Brisk, with those of his mindless follower, Fungoso. The plot establishes a paradoxical interaction for which, whenever the courtier enters the scene with a new colorful suit, impressing spectators on and off stage, the impoverished imitator is instantly at pains to obtain exactly the same piece of clothing, perpetuating the absurdity of a potentially endless cycle. In his most explicit exploration of the topic, _The Entertainment at Britain's Burse_ of 1609, the writer applies a similarly open-ended fluctuation to the concept of genuineness. Here the character of the _Master_ first celebrates the excellence of authentic porcelain, comparing it to the "most false and adulterate" quality of "counterfeit" products (ll. 70-71); however, towards the end of his speech, he decides that the "chemical plate" which he is then praising should be considered as undoubtedly "better than the authentical" (ll. 183-184). Based on inherently unstable categories, such as novelty or authenticity, processes of evaluation in the marketplace produce bounded ecosystems where desirable goods soon become indistinguishable from discardable waste.

We have seen how, partly on the grounds of these inconclusive evaluations and partly because of a dysfunctionally bounded environment, material and cultural artifacts are re-ingested into the ecosystem of _The Famous Voyage_ after their unsuccessful expulsion. Such was, for instance, the case of epic form and of the religious beliefs commonly associated to it, readmitted after a variation in the qualifications of "new" (not ancient) and "authentic" (neither fanciful nor superstitious). But the poem in its entirety also functions as an explicit mimicry of a commercial transaction, as revealed by the two contiguous passages which immediately follow the false _occupatio_ of the literary purge. The first mercantile performance, then, is the list of hyperboles through which, by parodying the language of publicity and financial negotiation, Jonson tries to prove how his new expedition will be more palatable than the recently discarded heroic matter. 

> Their wherry had no saile, too; ours had none:  
> And in it, two more horride knaves, then _Charon_.  
> Arses were heard to croake, in stead of frogs;  
> And for one _Cerberus_, the whole coast was dogs.  
> _Furies_ there wanted not: each scold was ten.  
> (11-14)

The poet offers a sequence of potential substitutions for the temporarily expelled mythological elements, in a succession which steadily increases their intensity and number. The narrative will feature "two [...] knaves" instead of one "_Charon_," and both "more horride" than him. The idyllic "frogs" will be replaced by the noisy emissions of "Arses," with a shift that adds smell to sound. Instead of "one _Cerberus_," the reader will encounter an evocative "coast" of "dogs." Finally, the "_Furies_" of ancient tradition will be bargained for improved "scolds," whose superiority - "each [...] was ten" - is neither solely quantitative nor qualitative, but monetary, like the one used to exchange the distinct coins of a single currency, which can be similarly appraised on a decimal scale. A few lines later, a second mercantile performance is used to connect the text to the tradition of the wager journeys (ll. 31-36), recalled through the specific mentions of "_Venice_, _Paris_, [...] _Berwicke_," and "_Norwich_." These were the recorded destinations of actual contemporary expeditions [most of them identified by @Donaldson2011, pp. 32-34], completed after the placing of a bet on their outcome [@Manous2009 3-9]. Like those travellers, one of the two sailors of the Fleet has given "His three for one" to be collected "at his returne from _Hell_" (ll. 29-28); and, like the those travellers, Jonson himself seems to be equating his work not to the achievements of classical "_Poets_," but to "th'adventer" of his age (l. 20), expecting a profit for his efforts. As we have seen, the _Epigrammes_, which ended with this poem, were edited for publication in 1612; the writer too, therefore, was financially invested in the commercial success of this _Famous Voyage_.

Before Jonson resolved to collect them for publication, the encomiastic and satirical _Epigrammes_ had been circulating for a while among the privileged spaces of literary circles and private declamations. They were copied and read in their manuscript form, as personal signs of affection or scorn, or as an unbiased proof of their author's literary genius [@Donaldson2000, 120-123]. Compared to what he had produced for the commercial arena of the stage, his poems were the result of a disinterested pursuit, and this was perhaps one of the reasons for which he could consider them "more important than anything he had written for performance" [@Miles1990, 169]. The decision to print and sell these intimate compositions presupposed a process of editorial selection and rejection, aesthetic and monetary evaluation, promotion and public circulation, which probably resonated with the themes developed in the _envoi_ of the collection, _The Famous Voyage_. Here we read about the anxieties of a writer who was compelled to turn his intellectual accomplishments into a commodity, a book destined to enter a cultural and material ecosystem which, as the infernal Fleet exemplified, was occasionally dysfunctional.

#Bibliography
